title: 'Item 23: Prefer non-member non-friend functions to member...'
tags:
  - c++
  - 'Effective C++'
  - encapsulation
  - 'functional extensibility'
  - 'packaging flexibility'
id: 821
categories:
  - Learn
  - Reading
  - Effective C++
date: 2013-01-17 20:22:37
---

This article is one of [&lt;Effective C++&gt;](http://www.yekezhong.com/844 "《Effective C++》阅读笔记 (系列)") reading notes.

## Part 4: Designs and Declarations

[Item 23: Prefer non-member non-friend functions to member functions](http://www.yekezhong.com/821 "Item 23: Prefer non-member non-friend functions to member functions").

* * *

## Things To Remember

*   Prefer non-member non-friend function. Doing so increases **encapsulation**, **packaging flexibility**, and **functional extensibility**.

## Key Points

**Increases encapsulation:**

*   It affords us the flexibility to change things tin a way that affects only a limited member of clients. The less code that can see the data (i.e., access it), the more the data is encapsulated.
*   Non-member non-friend function doesn't increase the number of functions than can access the private parts of the class.
*   **Module interfaces should be streamlined  as much as possible.**
*   Two things are worth noting: **1.)** this reasoning applies only to non-member non-friend functions. **2.)** a function be a non-member of one class doesn't mean it can't be a member of another class.
*   A more natural approach would be to make clearBrowser a nonmember function in the same namespace as WebBrowser.
**Increases packaging flexibility (包装弹性):**

*   This is exactly how the standard C++ library is organized. Rather than having a single monolithic &lt;C++StandardLibrary&gt; header containing everything in the std namespace, there are dozens of headers (e.g., [&lt;vector&gt;](http://www.yekezhong.com/574 "用allocator实现的标准库vector类模版"), &lt;algorithm&gt;, &lt;member&gt;, etc.), each declaring some of the functionality in std.
**Increases functional extensibility (功能扩展性):**

*   Putting all convenience functions in multiple header files -- but one namespace -- also means that clients can easily extend the set of convenience functions. All they have to do is add more non-member non-friend functions to the namespace.
*   Clients can drive new classes to extend the old one, but **derived classes have no access to encapsulated (i.e., private) members in the base class.**

## Code

``` c++
// header "webbrowser.h" -- header for class WebBrowser itself 
// as well as "core" WebBrowser-releated functionality 
namespace WebBrowserStuff {
 	class WebBrowser {
 	public:
 		// ...
 		void clearCache();
 		void clearHistory();
 		void removeCookies();
 		// ... 	};
 	// "core" related functionality, e.g. non-member functions almose all clients need
 	void clearBrowser(WebBrowser& wb)
 	{ 
		wb.clearCache();
 		wb.clearHistory;
 		wb.removeCookies();
 	}
 	// ... 
} 

// header "webbrowserbookmarks.h" 
namespace WebBrowserStuff {
// bookmark-releated convenience functions
	// ... 
} 

//header "webbrowsercookies.h" 
namespace WebBrowserStuff {
// cookie-releated convenience functions
 	// ...
}
```
